Kevin Duong – keduong 
Fall 2016 CMPE12 
Lab Section: 01J (Tu,Thur 7-9PM) TA:Chandrahas 
Due: December 2nd, 2016 
Lab 6: Decimal Converter

Purpose: 
The Objective of this lab is to apply our understanding of the MIPs instruction set and essentially
repeat the function of our Lab3.

Procedure: 
I began this lab by trying to understand what was given to us in the instuctions written up in the 
assignment page. A deviation from Lab3, which was in the LC-3 assembly language, was that MIPs and
the UNO32 is, as the name suggests, 32 bit and not 16. This meant that the majority the code I was
to transcribe from LC-3 to Uno32 had twice the amount of bits to work with, and that the output
was expected to be 16 bit as well. Another difference is that this assignment did not require i/o
interaction as the number to be converted was already stored in memory at inNumericString. This also
meant that the output was to be stored into outBinaryString, instead of to console. The programming 
aspect was mainly the same, meaning that this lab was primarily bit shifting and masking to compare
a given input value to 0x80000000 and print one for a match otherwise zero. While I essentially had
the concept understood (inherent in my lab3 completion) the mips language was a little too complex 
to apply for this lab. I was unable to get a functioning code, though I feel like the error that is
preventing my code from running is a simple memory reading/ writing error.

Conclusion:  
Personally, I feel that my understanding of MIPs is disappointing and feel responsibile for not putting 
in more effort for this lab. I feel that assembly language is a tough beast to overcome and when it comes
to patience for this kind of content I lack disipline. At the same time, I feel like more online
resources can be made available to the students of CMPE12, as labs where TAs have a limited amount of 
time as well as limited MSI sessions do supplement the class content but being able to work on getting
a better understanding of the course through online research feels like it would also be very 
beneficial to a better experience in this class.
